Docs: Integrated storage internal notes improvments (#16772)
hashicorp/vault: website/content/docs/internals/integrated-storage.mdx

to Paxos, Raft is designed to have fewer states and a simpler, more
understandable algorithm.

> The Raft protocol will not be covered in full here. A high level description is 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Raft protocol will not be fully covered here. However, a high level description is 
```

> provided which may be useful for building a mental model. Refer to the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
provided to help you build a mental model. Refer to the 
```

> complete specification that's described further on [this paper](https://raft.github.io/raft.pdf).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
complete specification that's described in [this paper](https://raft.github.io/raft.pdf).
```

Vault does not currently offer automated dead server cleanup. If you wish to
decommission a node, or a node dies and must be replaced, the node must manually
be removed from the cluster with the `remove peer` [command](/docs/commands/operator/raft#remove-peer).

### Quorum Management

#### Autopilot

An [Autopilot feature](https://www.vaultproject.io/docs/concepts/integrated-storage/autopilot) 
is available since 1.7.x & later versions that include configurable parameters 

> for when a node is treated as healthy before it's then an eligible voter in the 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for when a node is treated as healthy before it's considered an eligible voter in the 
```

> Quorum list. Other features which may enabled include the ability to remove nodes 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Quorum list. Other features which may be enabled include the ability to remove nodes 
```

considered as dead from the Quorum list after a certain period.

> Autopilot is typically enabled in most current versions of Vault with default 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Autopilot is enabled by default in Vault 1.7+  with default 
```

values that should be adapted to best suit the environmental requirements where 
Vault instances are deployed.

> Vault 1.7.x & higher include a stabilization logic that's available as part of 
> Autopilot and activated by default. Nodes that are new and a recent joiner are 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Autopilot includes stabilization logic for nodes joining the cluster.
Recently joined nodes are 
```

accepted as non-voter initially until they are in sync with matching Raft index 

> and only after a stability thresholds are they then full voting members.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and only after a stability thresholds are they then full voting members.
Setting the stability threshold too low can result in cluster instability as nodes will be
counted as voters before they are capable of voting.
```

This has led to some recent sev1s.

and only after a stability thresholds are they then full voting members.
Setting the stability threshold too low can result in cluster instability as nodes will be
counted as voters before they are capable of voting.

#### Without Autopilot

Older versions of Vault, 1.6.x & lower, as well as cases where Autopilot may be 
disabled or misconfigured, behave differently.

In scenarios involving those when a node joins a Raft cluster, it attempts to 
catch up with the reset of the nodes through the data that it's replicating from 
the leader. While in this initial synchronisation state, the node cannot 
vote but is counted for the purposes of quorum. If a number of new nodes join 
the cluster simultaneously or at similar times, and thereby exceeding the failure
tolerance of the cluster, quorum may be lost and the cluster can fail.

For example, consider a scenario where there is a 3-node cluster with a large 
amount of data and a failure tolerance of 1. An additional 3 new nodes then 
join the cluster. The cluster now consists of 6 nodes with a failure tolerance 
of 2, but since all 3 nodes are still catching up, this will result in a loss of 

> quorum.

Reviewer 3: This particular example confuses me a little bit because when we talk about cluster sizes, we typically use odd numbers, e.g. 3 or 5, so that there are no ties when voting occurs. Can you re-work the cluster size to be either 5 or 7 (5 is a bit more typical).

Author: @raskchanky - we are specifically highlighting how not to do it here.

Simply put going from 3 to 6 nodes, or 100% extra, in a single leap is the receipt for the loss of quorum as detailed.

The same conditions are still applicable in cases of older Vault versions as well anywhere else where the auto-pilot may be disabled / miss configured.

* A 3 node cluster with a large amount of data that's at a failure tolerance of 1.
* Another 3 new nodes then join the cluster together.

> * Now the cluster consists of 6 nodes with a failure tolerance of 2, but all 3 new nodes are still catching up, resulting in a loss of quorum.

Reviewer 3: These bullet points feel a little redundant, as they say the same thing as the preceding paragraph.

Author: A little repeat is not bad - some people dont read sentence as well as bullets and these are summaries of the same thing. I dont see any issue as it re-enforces the earlier sentence more briefly - lets keep it.

For this reason, we recommend ensuring new nodes have Raft indexes that are
close to the leader before adding additional nodes. Raft indexes are visible via

> `vault status`.

Reviewer 3: Is it worth also adding something about joining new nodes one at a time and ensuring the cluster is stable before adding additional nodes? (specifically to avoid the scenario you outlined about joining many nodes at once and losing quorum).

Author: I dont think +1 is necessary nor should it be the norm if operators remain within a 5 node cluster set then it ought to in fact be +2 and in the case of failures on 7 nodes the quorum will not break (ditto 7, 9, etc). Down scaling can also follow a similar trend as noted at the end - add 2 to then take former two out - but dont do it in 1s.

be removed from the cluster with the `remove peer`
[command](/docs/commands/operator/raft#remove-peer).

### Quorum Management

> As soon as a node joins a Raft cluster, it attempts to catch up with the reset 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a node joins a Raft cluster, it attempts to catch up with the reset 
```

> of the nodes via the data that it's replicating from the leader. While in 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the nodes through the data that it's replicating from the leader. While in 
```

this initial synchronisation state, the node cannot vote but is counted for 
the purposes of quorum. If a number of new nodes join the cluster 

> simultaneously or at similar times, and thereby exceed the failure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
simultaneously or at similar times, and thereby exceeding the failure
```

tolerance of the cluster, quorum may be lost and the cluster can fail.

> For example - there may be a scenario where:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, there may be a scenario where:
```

    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

### Minimums & Scaling

The [Vault Reference Architecture](https://learn.hashicorp.com/tutorials/vault/raft-reference-architecture#recommended-architecture) 
recommends a 5 node cluster to ensure a minimum failure tolerance of at least 2.

It is good practise, wherever possible, to retain a failure tolerance of 2 or 
more.

> A scaling approach can be pursued in the event of maintenance and other changes 

Reviewer 3: I think it's worth noting that autopilot auto-upgrades make this type of scenario much easier. If autopilot auto-upgrades are in use (which is the default in any enterprise cluster 1.11.0+), customers can use their own semantic version compatible version string for the `autopilot_upgrade_version` configuration key and roll clusters at will, just by starting new nodes and waiting for autopilot to do the rest. [These docs](https://www.vaultproject.io/docs/enterprise/automated-upgrades), particularly the section on blue/green style deploys, have more detail.

Author: I dont think any further additions are needed at the end - rather we are just stating to maintain a size were failure tolerance are respected and autopilot can have no bearing on the user choosing for example to scale below the advise reference architectures.

What's more irrespective of the enhancements and features for blue/green style deployments - user can choose to deploy in sets which break quorum onto even sets - as for example with 3 to 4 node transitions or anything else which is either below min failure tolerance of 2 or redundantly even.

PS - I've seen other docs out there signifying odd parity and appropriate scaling too and I think its not bad to mention this +2 that's not so obvious for everyone.

where an additional pair of nodes (ie two) are added in an existing 5 node cluster 
making for a 7 node cluster. Once new joiners are confirmed to be in sync then 
the 2 older nodes can be stopped and or destroyed with the same processes being 
repeated until all other nodes have been replaced. This use of additional nodes 
on a temporary basis of a 7 node cluster arrangement, concluding back to 5 nodes, 
may be one way to ensure sufficient failure tolerance is maintained and that 
changes are made progressively in proportion to the cluster failure tolerance and 

> never exceeding the available failure tolerance in any given one-time.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
never exceeding the available failure tolerance at any given time.
```

> The intent with any change or scaling ought to be with the lose of Quorum and 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The intent with any change or scaling ought to be with the loss of quorum and 
```

> reduction of the Quorum failure tolerances at the forefront and discouraging 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
reduction of the quorum failure tolerances at the forefront and discouraging 
```
